In this video let us take this sample recursive
algorithm and find its time complexity using recursion tree
and back substitution method
So this is the algorithm and we already wrote the recurrence
relation for this algorithm the recurrence relation for this algorithm
is T(n) is T(n-1) + 1
where n>0 and T(n)
is 1 when n=0 so let us solve this
recurrence relation with recursion tree method. For that first we
need to draw the recursion tree
Then we need to mark the time taken at each
level
And finally we can calculate the total time complexity
So first let us draw the recursion tree first
write T(n)
What will T(n) do if n is greater than
zero It will print n and call itself with
n-1
The print statement will take one unit of time
So write one and T(n-1) here
again T(n-1)
is a recursive call so it will take one
unit of time and call itself with n-2
again n-2
is a recursive call so It will also take one
unit of time and call itself with n-3
This recursive tree will grow similarly and it will
stop at T(0). At T(0)
it won't make any further recursive call as
n=0
Now there is marked the total time taken at each
level of the tree
Since there is only one print statement preasant in the
algorithm at each level, it will only take a constant
amount of time so we can write one unit
of time for each level
Finally let us calculate the total complexity for nth level
The will be n+1
recursive calls and each call takes one unit of
time
Here plus one is for the recursive call T(0)
So total complexity is
n+1
We can say it is O(n) or Linear
time function
That's it
This is how we can calculate the time complexity of
the recursive function using recursion tree method
Next Let us calculate the time complexity using back substitution method
which is also known as iteration method
In this approach we put the recurrence relation back into
itself until we see a pattern and when we see
the pattern we will solve it
For example here the recurrence relation is T(n)
equal to T(n-1) + 1
If T(n) is equal to T(n-1) + 1
then what will be T(n-1)
It will be T(n-1-1) + 1
that is  T(n-2)
plus one
So in this equation instead of T(n-1)
we can substitute T(n-2)+1
so it will become T(n-2)
plus 2
And now what will be T(n-2). It
will be  T(n-2-1) + 1
that is T(n-3)+1
So instead of T(n-2) substitute
T(n-3)+1 and it will become
T(n-3)+3
Similarly if we back substitute for K times we will
get T(n) equal to T(n-k)+K
here the value of n is decreasing
by one at each level and at some level it
will become zero but we don't exactly know at which
level
So let us  assume that Kth  level the value of n
becomes zero
If that is the case the value of n-k
will be zero at Kth level
And when we say n-k=0 it
means K equal to n
So we can substitute n instead of K in this
equation
So it will become T(n) equals to T(n-n)+n
and n-n equal to zero
So it will become T(0)
And we know the value of T(0) is
So substituted one instead of T(0) and we
will get T(n) equal to 1+n
Thats it. we got the answer
that is n+1 time
And this is linear time function and we can save
this recurrence relations time
Complexity is O(n) and that's it.
We have got the same time complexity in both recursion
tree and back substitution method
In the next videos we will see more examples. Thankyou!